[Music]
great um thank you very much Tom for
that nice introduction I'd also like to
thank Ken Ford for the invitation uh to
come down here and uh and present a talk
on some of our uh recent work involed
olving uh
cancer
um so I have the slide here cancer and
metabolic disease uh with metabolic
Solutions um having worked in the area
for some number of years it becomes
clear to me I think we have a
path uh to manage better this disease
than the path and the approaches that we
are currently
on um I start with I know you might not
be able to see these numbers clearly but
that's not that
important um these numbers are the what
I have here
is a question for you all to think about
but I've also broken down from the
American Cancer Society data on um
cancer statistics new cases deaths per
year and deaths per day and I have this
in my book and I keep adding every year
uh the idea you know when when is this
going to change okay now um if you look
at the numbers they're quite sobering
okay uh but people look into these
numbers and see uh um significant uh
advance and the advance that they see is
that the number of deaths the increase
in debts per year is not this increase
is not as fast as the number of new
cases and based on that they say we're
winning the war on cancer um you know
I'm looking at this and I'm not going to
say you you can choose you can make the
decision now the the other issue is of
course you know with with uh 1500 1,600
people a day dying from cancer people I
they know this is a problem but can you
imagine if we had 1500 people a day
dying from Ebola uh think of it would it
would lead to a national panic but yet
in cancer it it seems to be uh kind of I
don't know if you want to say it's
accepted or just this is the way it is
well I I I think there's a there has to
be a change here we're spending billions
of dollars on this disease and that the
the incidence continues to increase and
so do the deaths per day all right so so
what why is this okay what's going on
here and it's my view that we have
misunderstood what the nature of this
disease actually is and this is what I'd
like to focus on and I like to provide
you with data uh evidence to show
what we think the disease is and and and
and what and what the disease really is
so the provocative question is cancering
nuclear genetic disease or a metabolic
mitochondrial metabolic dise very
important because the answer to this
question will change the way we uh study
the disease and the way we uh try to
manage uh the
disease so uh what in in today the
academic and pharmaceutical Industries
view cancer as a genetic disease and
this is what we call the Dogma this is a
belief an unshakable belief is a dogma
and uh this paper Hallmarks of cancer
the Next Generation by uh hannahan and
Weinberg is one of the most highly cited
from their previous and their current
papers this is cited many many times
because this sets out the Dogma as
cancer is a genetic
disease and when I say it's a Dogma
because I teach biology at Boston
College and all the books on
biochemistry cell biology biology they
talk about cancer as a genetic disease
involved with enogen and tumor
suppressor genes and this kind of stuff
it's in all the textbooks our young
people are indoctrinated into thinking
and studying cancer as a genetic disease
it's the fundamental basis for the
pharmaceutical and academic Industries
in their grants and in their approaches
and things like this is that is that
right
though so and this is a textbook what we
show in the textbooks that you'll find
in in in college textbooks
they they they look at this as oh here's
a car the the the pedal is to the metal
and the the brakes are off okay so this
is basically a a situation where the
they're looking at these cells as being
completely disregulated because they
they can't stop growing so the the key
thing about cancer is this cell division
out of
control and then we look at the Proto
anag genes these are uh people have one
Nobel prizes for this mutations in these
genes uh uh lead to various kinds you
get multiple mutations and
rearrangements and what it basically
does is it stimulates these cells to
grow faster and uncontrolled these these
enogen derived from protooncogenes tumor
suppressor genes prevent uh uh uh
prevent tumor tumorogenesis so here's a
normal tumor suppressor Gene it produces
a product that keeps these cells in
check you can see they're they have
appearance of not growing too fast but
if you have a mutation in that
suppressor Gene then all of a sudden
these cells start to you don't have a
control over them and the and the
signature feature is uncontrolled cell
growth so it's a
combination uh according to the Dogma
It's a combination of here's a normal
cell and you and you have normal
chromosomes and on those chromosomes are
genes and then all of a sudden pop you
get a sematic mutation here a sematic
mutation there you get a few more
sematic mutations and all of a sudden
the cell becomes a malignant cell and
then you have to use all kinds of
treatments and this person you know uh
is one is an individual now part of the
part of the system uh involved in
personalized therapies because she's
looking at a at a a readout of the gene
mutations in this person's breast tumor
and they're going to make a a
therapeutic decision by by looking at
all these different kinds of mutations
and then they're going to say okay I can
if we use this drug or that drug or this
approach or that approach we may be able
to Target one of these different kinds
of mutations and then maybe we'll be
able to uh you know provide some sort of
a therapy problem is every cell in the
tumor is a different genetic entity as
thousands and thousands of mutations no
tumor it's just a it's a big hodgepodge
from the The genome projects and then
this one is it's bad
luck sorry it's bad luck and that paper
just came out in science last month okay
from the vulin group at at John's
Hopkins it's almost like a fat of
complete it's like uh you know what you
oh well you just have bad luck and
you're going to have these mutations
you're going to get cancer and then
they're going to try to treat you for
this stuff so so we have this and this
is where it is this is the this is where
it is today all major medical schools
are
building Departments of personalized
medicine so we can screen all the
mutations in the tumor cells to develop
very expensive drugs that often don't
work very well and can harm you but yet
we're going forward with immunotherapies
all this kind of
stuff evidence the challenges the
sematic mutate what you mean to tell me
there's no EV everybody is bought on to
this Dogma okay why no one challenges
why why no one talks about the articles
that don't support that let me show you
some examples okay this is a paper
published in a top Journal science in
1969 from mckinnel group it's a a tumor
in a frog it has a renal kidney tumor
and and the frogs are good because we
can do a lot of nice developmental
studies on them because we before we
clone Dolly the sheep they did a lot of
this work in frogs so what mckinnel did
was to ask you know what what is the the
nucleus of the tumor cell doing and in
controlling the the growth of the tumor
so here's they take the tumor out you
take the cell out of the tumor and you
take the nucleus out of the tumor cell
and you put it into a new cell of a
fertilized egg so this is a new frog
fertilized egg except the original
nucleus was removed and the nucleus from
the tumor cell was placed into that egg
and you got a tadpole and this tadpole
looked perfectly normal there was
nothing wrong with this tadpole what
happened to the enco jees and tumor
suppressor genes that were supposed to
be responsible the disregulated cell
growth we don't know but what's
interesting is the tadpole didn't grow
it didn't develop into a mature frog the
new the mutations or whatever the defs
were in that nucleus prevented further
development so there was an abortion or
a abreg a blockage of further
development now this was a study done by
in another powerful Journal pnas by uh
beatric mince uh who was one of the the
leaders in mamalian developmental
biology and she cloned mik from the
nuclei of teratoma cells and her
conclusions were it's not possible that
somatic mutations can be responsible you
got a mouse cloned from the nucleus of a
tumor cell if the nuclear sematic
mutations are causing the disregulated
growth how is it possible that you can
cont that you can develop a mouse or
clone a mouse from the nucleus of a
tumor cell something is wrong here and
she said it's it can't structural
mutations in the genome can't explain
this this was a more recent paper by Jim
Morgan's group at St Judes they cloned a
mouse from the nucleus of a brain tumor
all right this was a medul blastoma and
they implanted it into an embryonic stem
cell and this is the mouse embryo you
can see it here but the germ layers
maderm ectoderm endoderm are all in
their ordered uh places there's no
abnormal growth okay but the only
problem is the embryos would only go to
a certain point and then abort there was
something these abnormalities in the
nucleus of the tumor cell
they were not causing tumors they were
aborting development okay so you have to
go back and say what is the Hallmark
feature of cancer disregulated
disordered growth driven by enogen and
tumor suppressor genes we're not seeing
that when we do these kinds of studies
and always people always say oh these
are these are you know U exceptions
exceptions exceptions well Rudy yanish
found the same kind of an exception he
cloned Mice from the nuclei of melanoma
cells and he was he wanted to make make
sure his group wanted to make sure how
is it possible what happens to all these
mutations that are in the nucleus of the
melanoma cell did they go away so he
takes the nucleus and puts it into a
stem cell and clones this mouse and he
looks at the mouse and finds the same
genetic mutations in this mouse that was
present in the in the in the melanoma
but the this doesn't have the tumors so
again we're seeing this over and over
and then a more recent paper came out
and showed that if you transfer
mitochondria non-cancerous mitochondria
the mitochondria I'll talk about in a
minute these are the little organel
inside the cell that generate the energy
in our body okay but you can you can
completely shift the tumorogenic the
cancer phenotype by moving these
mitochondria around regardless of what
kind of nucleus is in there whether it's
a tumorogenic or a non- tumorogenic
nucleus these findings are incompatible
with sematic mutation theory of cancer
so what what we did then is we I now I
only gave you a snapshot of of many many
many studies that I pulled together for
the first time and when you see these
data for the first time one after
another after another you say to
yourself what is going on here do the
people who run the genome projects know
about this often times they ignore it
they don't discuss
this now what now here it is okay normal
cells beget normal cells tumor cells in
red beget tumor cells what is
responsible for this disregulated cell
growth is it the mutations in the
nucleus as the Dogma would state or is
it something to do with abnormalities in
the mitochondria in the cytoplasm those
little bean-shaped organel because
they're abnormal also in the tumor cell
these tumor cells don't have normal
energy metabolism so red cells tumor
cells beg tumor cells so when you do the
experiments and you move the nucleus of
the tumor cell and now put it into a
normal cytoplasm you get normal cells
you get sometimes normal tissue and as I
showed you you can sometimes develop a
whole mouse or a frog from the nucleus
of the tumor cell which is supposed to
contain the mutations that drive the
disease and we don't see that and if you
take the nucleus out of a normal cell
and put it into a tumor cell cytoplasm
you either get dead cells or tumor cells
there's something going on here what's
happening is that the the normal
mitochondria can suppress the formation
of tumors and whatever the gene
mutations happen to be they're not the
drivers of this
disease yet we're spending we're
focusing on that
so if the somatic mutations are not the
origin of cancer where does cancer come
from how do we get
cancer warberg had it pegged a long time
ago in Germany one of the leading
biochemists of the 20th century warberg
said cancer arises from damage to
cellular respiration all right we
breathe in air we exhale this is our
respiration our cells we respire we are
a respire we respire get our energy from
from oxygen and we burn fuels cancer
cells have defects in respiration and
then if they have the defect in
respiration they must compensate some
way and they ferment energy through
fermentation gradually compensates for
insufficient respiration fermentation is
a primitive energy source that existed
before oxygen came on the planet cells
continue to ferment lactic acid in the
presence of oxygen normal cell if you
hold your breath your cells begin to
ferment you breathe and then you remove
the you build up lactic acid you get rid
of the LA itic acid you exercise a lot
you can build up the cancer cells
continue to produce lactic acid even
though there's oxygen present
something's wrong here there's a problem
in their respiration enhanced
fermentation is the sign met signature
metabolic malady of all cancer cells now
I showed you that picture of that woman
looking at the screen looking at the
hundreds of mutations every Cancer cell
has different kinds of mutations but
they all ferment that's the that's what
they do they ferment why we not focus on
their abnormality that's common to all
the cells rather than focusing on the
defects that's present only in a few of
them those are the questions people have
to ask now cellular energy metabolism
and this is a very simplistic diagram I
don't want to get into all the pathways
most of the energy we have in our body
comes from oxidative phosphorilation by
breathing oxygen through the electron
transport chain in the mitochondria of
our
cells now we get a little bit of energy
in glycolysis in the cytoplasm and a
little bit of energy in this kreb cycle
cancer
cells have less energy coming from oxida
phosphorilation and more energy coming
from these more primitive forms of
energy this is the difference between
the cancer cell and the normal cell the
common difference that we see not the
mutations but this is the common
difference now here's an ex's a visual
example of what I'm talking about
mitochondrial morphology a little
bean-shaped organel in the cytoplasm is
the energy source of our cells the power
plants in our cells of these little
mitochondria they they're laced
throughout the side of them in our cell
and then these little Stripes you see
these little Stripes these bands they
are called chiste and in those little
bands contain the proteins and the
lipids necessary for us to breathe and
for our energy and our bodies to work
here's a a mitochondria and a g blastoma
multiform it's a human very deadly human
brain tumor and you can see it's empty
inside it's called chysis there's
breakdown of Chate so the the the
mitochondrian cancer cells have defects
in the very structures needed for them
to respire there's no way that this
organel is going to be able to use
oxygen efficiently to produce energy so
therefore the cell to survive must
ferment and that's what these cancer
cells are doing they're all fermentors
to one degree or
another now Pete Peterson Johns Hopkins
published a beautiful paper in 1978
documenting that there is no known tumor
cell that doesn't have some defect
however small in the in the structure of
these little
organel so based on that information and
based on the information that I'm going
to show you about how to manage some of
these diseases we put together and I
know this is a little hard for the
people in the back to see and it tries
to encapsulate all of the observations
the majority of the observations that we
see in cancer based on a metabolic
underpin okay this is what we're trying
to do we're trying to show that if your
hypothesis or your theory is correct you
should be able to account and explain
the vast changes that we see in the
disease and we can first of all we have
this oncogenic Paradox which has puzzled
everyone from the beginning the the
great minds and the thinkers how is it
possible that we could have so many
provocative agents in the environment
that we know cause cancer cause the
disease through a common mechanism all
right so for example I mean we we have
um carcinogens you know we have
radiation hypoxia inflammation rare
inherited mutations people think cancer
must be a genetic disease because I got
I inherited a gene from my mother or my
father and gave me cancer that Gene
product Targets this this little organel
the mitochondria and makes it
inefficient so that is the primary cause
of the damage to this organal all of
these different provocative agents will
do that viruses people know hepatitis C
papiloma viruses they cause cancer they
cause cancer because they disrupt the
energy metabolism in that organel and
age we get older older people are more
prone to cancer than younger people
because that organel gets damaged with
age now what happens is when that
organel is damaged it produces these
reactive oxygen species a toxic
byproducts of energy metabolism and
these Ross are both carcinogenic and
mutagenic they will damage the DNA in
the nucleus and they will further damage
the energy metabolism in the in the
mitochondria so these little rths are
produced from this plethora of disperate
some people say I don't know how I got
cancer I did this I did that I was you
know it could be from any one of these
things damaging that producing these Ros
the Ros then damage the D and the so all
the mutations and broken de chromosomes
and all these things that we see and
that we're studying and we're spending
billions of dollars on are Downstream
epiphenomena of the damage to the
respiration now what happens here is we
have normal respiration and we have this
old fermentation pathway and as warberg
said as the respiration becomes damaged
from a chronic inflammatory from smoking
from carcinogens or whatever respiration
in the cell goes down and the cell to
survive must begin the fermentation the
red line goes up the cells are
compensating their insiration for the
Primitive form of energy that existed on
the planet before oxygen came in which
is fermentation now what's driving this
the anog Gen these things that we're all
focusing on they are the mitochondria
signal the nucleus we are insufficient
with respiration we're going to die if
we don't get help so what happens is the
signals go to the nucleus enogen turn on
the enogen are transcription factors
that increase fermentation energy
Pathways all right so this is an effect
it's a knee-jerk response to the damage
of that organel now you go back and you
begin to put all the pieces of the whole
marks of cancer together linked to the
damage to that one organel and you can
do that I've done it and it's very
remarkable how you can count for all of
the thousands of studies that are being
done on cancer can all be linked back to
this one common factor which is damage
to the respiration so we've seen
angiogenesis avoidance of apotosis
apoptosis if a cancer cell has defective
respiration it should be dead and that's
what happens as warberg said if you
damage the respiration too acutely the
cell dies it can never become a cancer
cell but what we have here is we have
avoidance of apotosis and then you have
this metastatic issue where we have
shown the B our immune cells of our body
fuse with these tumor cells and you have
metastasis because these cells naturally
spread throughout the body published
several papers on that so if all cancers
are a type of mitochondrial metabolic
disease then what therapies might be
effective for managing the tumors
calorie restriction is what brought us
to the idea that you know what's going
on here a metabolic cancer intervention
it involves total dietary restriction
differs from starvation people say oh
cafrey does starvation studies no I
don't kahill did starvation studies tah
Hill used he's the world expert he was
before he when was alive calorie
restriction is very therapeutic you
don't starve to death people some people
say oh I haven't eaten for three days
I'm starving today you're not starving
to death you have to go but my students
tell me I said how long are you going to
go before you how how long how long you
think you're going to live without
eating oh two days so I I I said you're
going to be dead in two days if you
don't
eat oh maybe I may think about that a
little bit
more I'm I feel like I'm going to be
dead so so anyway it maintains middle or
and Newtons enhance enhances mitochondri
this is another thing if you stop eating
the mitochondria they go through the
autophagy procedure the mitochondria get
broken down this mitochondria is not
working get rid of him put him in the
lome reconfigure his his metabolites and
we're going to have new andal
mitochondria woo see our MIM now don't
forget now oh we do all this work in the
mice oh will it work in human well you
when the human finds out what he has to
do to make the to make it look like he's
the mouse I don't want to do this so
therapeutic fasting what is that mean
drink water for three or four days maybe
a week and then I'll get the same
benefit as this poor Mouse now the the
the thing of it is the B basil metabolic
rate of the mouse is seven times faster
than that of the human it's unbelievable
these guys eat 25% of their body weight
to day you know it's unbelievable humans
are much more capable of dealing with
these metabolic shifts than is the mouse
now when we stop eating blood sugar goes
down for the most part most of us
obviously you're not eating anything the
brain needs sugar the brain needs
glucose oh if we stop eating to day I
should be unconscious laying on the
floor writhing around well what happens
how come I'm not doing that because we
have L insulin goes down glucagon comes
up and then you start mobilizing the
fats after a couple of you know 36 hours
get rid of the glycogen and we take the
fats and it goes to the liver and the
liver breaks up like putting it's like
putting long logs of fatty acids into a
wood chipper out come these water
soluble Ketone bodies and they go to the
brain and the Brain will burn ketones
and glucose so the ketones take the
pressure off the fact that you're
lowering blood sugar this is an
evolutionary evolutionarily conserved
adaptation to starvation otherwise we
would have been wiped out as a species
humans evolve to starve we can go long
periods I long conversations with K
about how long people can go without
eating and still be healthy starvation
is a pathological state it it it there's
a period when therapeutic fasting moves
to starvation which is pathological and
that's very dangerous so don't think
that you have to be very careful about
this beta hydroxy butyrate aceto these
are water soluble breakdown products of
fat and they are powerful energy
metabolites that will allow our body to
function at maximal Energy Efficiency
but you only when the glucose goes down
now this is a diagram explaining a
little bit how this might work to kill
tumor cells or at least arrest their
disregulated proliferation so here we
have this cell here's a blood vessel
okay all of our tissues have blood
vessels through them okay glucose comes
into the cell and is metabolized through
the glycolytic pathway to pyruvate and
it's fully oxidized but the tumor cell
as I told you this organel is defective
in the tumor cell so consequently the
glucose they they blow out lactic acid
they convert pyu this is a waste product
lactic acid it goes into the outside of
the cell and creates an acidic micro
environment this brings in makes the
immune system look oh everybody the
micro environment all these cells are
coming in secreting all these different
kinds of factors because the cells can't
effectively respire so what we do is we
lower the blood sugar that's the fuel
for this growing beast and we bring in
the ketones the ketones are raised up
they come into the cell they bypass this
they go right into the mitochondria
problem tumor cells have all these
defects they can't use the ketones the
normal cells in the brain are burning
these ketones because we evolved to do
that the tumor cells are stumbling
staggering this is a fuel they can't use
because they're mitochondria defective
so what we do is we metabolically
marginalize these cells it kills a lot
of them but doesn't kill them all but it
slows the whole process down and we we
we we actually showed here's an example
of a mouse that has a big tumor and it
we just take away the food that he eats
restrict his food by
40% and this is AD libidum means Mouse
eats whatever he wants whenever he wants
you get and then we just restricted this
and you can see we got anywhere from a
65 to 85% reduction in the size of the
tumor simply by taking away reducing the
amount of food and we also went on to
show each little square is a mouse under
a different diet condition as glucose
goes down ketones go up this is an
evolutionary conserved response to the
absence of glucose as glucose goes down
the tumor size goes down we we were one
of the first to show this and many
people now have shown this and all kinds
of humans with different kinds of
cancers brain cancer linked to blood
sugar it doesn't mean that Sugar causes
the cancer but if you have the tumor the
tumor will grow faster with the higher
blood sugar the higher your sugar the
faster that tumor is going to grow
because it's going to ferment the sugar
Prime fuel for
fermentation tumor what are the now
people say what's the mechanism what's
the mechan you got to show the mechanism
we showed the mechanism okay
anti-angiogenic we showed insulin like
growth factor signaling Cascades go down
akt signaling goes down we showed all
this stuff anti-inflammatory these drugs
in the pharmaceutical industry
anti-angiogenic anti-inflammatory
molecules are big business nothing is as
powerful as this calorie restriction in
targeting those Pathways NF Capa B
pathway also proapototic if you're going
to kill your tumor cells you want to
make sure you're killing only your tumor
cells and not the cells surrounding it
all right and that you want them to die
by their own self self suicide apotosis
you want to kill them by this tumor cell
droing dead you don't want to blast the
whole environment kill everybody along
with the tumor cell this calorie
restriction and ketogenic diet
restrictions kill these cells through a
proapototic mechanism which is really
nice star contrast to standards of care
research question okay what about GBM we
do a lot of work with brain tumors we
buildt some of the finest and best
models of brain cancer that replicate
exactly what goes on in the human brain
and here's an example of one of these
models so this is a this dark blue
material here those are the tumor cells
and you put a few cells into this
Mouse's brain and it migrates from one
side of the brain to the other other and
goes to different regions very quickly
just like GBM does the human GBM we put
the mouse under calorie restriction and
and you can see we don't kill the tumor
completely but we restrict a lot of its
if its Invasion and migr migratory
Behavior very interesting now the
problem with calorie restriction is its
calorie restriction the name itself
people have cancer they're under a lot
of mental stress they're in duress and
now you tell the poor guy well you're
goingon to have to stop eating for like
three weeks he doesn't want to hear that
okay so so what we do is we can we can
achieve the same kinds of metabolic
manipulation with these ketogenic
diets now what is a ketogenic diet a lot
of controversy oh this ketogenic diet
what is a ketogenic diet well basically
and they come in all sizes and shapes
and you got to be careful okay so it's
basically a low carbohydrate diet high
fat a moderate protein gets a lot of
energy per gram of food ketogenic diets
in my view should always be consumed in
restricted amounts anyway but you know
the interesting thing the human brain if
you eat fat you feel full all right A
lot of people eat the oh I've had enough
some sometimes it's not always as tasty
as you like it to be and you just don't
want to eat anymore because it doesn't
taste good but the issue is and you get
indirect calorie restriction like that
but the issue is uh it there's hormones
in our brain and our body that respond
to this that give us a natural
restriction of food now people say uh
here's here's a mouse tumor and a human
tumor to be compared uh with growth
under the calorie restricted ketogenic
diet now here's the unrestricted high
carb diet now here's a ketogenic diet
where the mouse is not restricted he
eats as much as he wants there's no
change in the tumor either the mouse
tumor or the human human tumor it is
only when we restrict the diet do we see
the the reduction in tumor size now this
is very important blood glucose and
blood ketones people say well you're
eating a diet that has no carbohydrates
in it you know one or 2% sometimes zero
how is it possible that you're
maintaining high blood sugar when you're
eating a diet that has no carbohydrates
in it where's the sugar coming from it's
coming from the liver if you eat too
much fat you get dyslipidemia insulin
insensitivity and the blood sugar stays
High you got to cut this down a little
bit then once the blood sugar goes down
the ketones go up now look at here's the
guy eating all the ketogenic want are
you getting ketones from this yes he's
getting ketones they're higher but he's
peeing them out as fast as he's making
them he's peeing them out but if you
restrict the diet now they stay in the
bloodstream and they stay much higher
concentrations and the important issue
here is that ketones if you can get them
high enough they will absolutely kill
the tumor cells Dom datino and I showed
this and so did several others they act
as histone deyas Inhibitors this is very
interesting because the pharmaceutical
industry has a big platform on
developing histone deas drugs to kill
tumor cells they're very toxic and
expensive you can do the same thing if
you can get your ketones high enough but
you got to lower that blood sugar now
here's the plan you get your blood sugar
down you get your ketones up and you get
into this so-called zone of metabolic
management and we're trying to achieve
that now this is a very interesting
picture of a dog with a big tumor on his
face
now some woman from Georgia uh read our
papers and our looked at our videos and
YouTubes and she she had this big dog
and it had this big massel tumor on his
face here's his nose and here's the
tumor and and she said I did what you
said I I fed my dog uh she gave went to
the butcher got organic chicken with the
bone still in the meat and she get a
little uh medium chain triglyceride oil
a little raw egg and she calculated the
size of her dog how many calories the
dog should eat what should I do to
restrict the the the 40% calories and uh
she she gave the dog that and and and
and within a very short period of time
you can see the dates here this tor
Shrunk the Vets the the vet said that
you're going to have to have surgery
radiation and chemo and it's going to be
expensive and the dog may leave only six
months so she did this on her own
without any training and look here's
April 20 here's April 2014 and this she
sent me the picture last last month 25th
January 2015 how's the dog doing it's
doing fine I mean the dog you should
have been dead right so anyway some vets
came to my lab up at the tough New
England veter school they had come to me
a couple of years ago and they said Hey
listen we want to try ketogenic diets on
the dogs oh it's going to be tough you
know they're saying to me I I told them
what they have to do we have to bring
the dogs into the clinic do all this
stuff so I showed her I said well listen
here's something that might work you
might guys might want to consider so I
showed her this the the Vets up at the
toughs and they said whoa this is really
interesting but we can't use this kind
of therapy in our clinic and I said why
and she said we don't believe in feeding
dogs raw meat
eat I said
what I said the damn dog evolved to eat
what do you think they were eating
Kibbles and bits in the
forest you
know I mean this is we're up against a
mindset here when you when you take your
brain and you put it into a different
sphere you can't see what goes on up or
down so but there are people who are
aware of this and they're going to start
moving on it because I think if we can
cure if we can manage these dogs cancer
some some guy May Come to me can you do
that to me you know so mean it's we're
up against all kinds you have no idea
all the all the firewalls that exist can
a ketogenic diet be affect m in in in
patients what about people okay Linda
nebling now at the NIH she took two
little girls hopeless cases they were
really in bed sheep you got to read if
you read the article you'd be shocked at
these po what they did to these little
kids poison the to the toxic drugs the
kids gave them it's just sad it makes
you cry when you read it they were
radiated they were surgically mutilated
they all kinds of things and then she
grabbed them put them on this ketogenic
diet and their quality of life came back
they they they started to interact with
their friends they went back to school
now they didn't survive at least we
don't one was lost to followup one lived
much longer than than was expected but
their quality of life increased
dramatically when they were put on the
ketogenic diet and she lowered the blood
sugar and she elevated the ketones just
as we did for the dog and these mice and
the kids got the same kind of an effect
everybody oh it's anecdotal you got to
run a clinical trial and stuff but but
I'm telling you we've seen this in
across the species so so anyway we we we
we designed a a protocol now we first
had to characterize yes she has GBM path
pathological report now here's the big
tumor um in the brain it's a
multicentric gasto these are the worst
of the worst kind I mean these tumors
are really nasty and uh you know we we
we we got this and then as soon as she
came out of surgery uh we uh she went on
a ketogenic diet calorie restricted
therapeutic fast water only all this
kind of stuff we were able to bring her
blood sugars down her ketones up a
little
and then we had an MRI several months
after all this now she was getting
radiation and she was getting chemo so
not not not Tim as alline she was off
the steroids she was getting radiation
but we have here a tumor several uh
months later and we call this
radiological resolution you don't see
any tumor in her brain anymore and
everybody was like shocked not that it
doesn't happen it happens very very
rarely and maybe maybe she's one of
those rare cases but we had several more
like this over periods of months and it
looked like everything was good so she
she was swimming in the medit she felt
good her quality of life was excellent
she gets off the diet and then about two
or three months later that the tumor
comes back and rather than going back on
the metabolic therapy she decides to go
on a vastin which is a big Blockbuster
drug in the pharmaceu pharmaceutical
companies I said don't use that I I've
looked into vastin it's the worst of the
worst drug never used it the FDA pulled
it off the market for breast cancer but
they haven't pulled it off for for brain
the the tumor came back and she
died so we learned a lot from this and
we learned what we should do then I said
to myself what's going on with the
standard of care so what do we do to
people that have brain tumors all right
so uh I published a paper and I was just
so pissed off and I never thought
anybody would accept this paper for
publication but the lanc and oncology
one of the top cancer journals did
publish it I was I was shocked actually
so so anyway I we draw this cartoon my
students and I so what here's you have
this this big tumor and then the surgeon
will come in and he'll try to reect as
much as he can and then what happens is
he can't get it all and then they
irradiate the remainder and they cause
the breakdown of all these uh
metabolites glutamine as I said is a
powerful fuel for these tumor cells and
it comes as the result of creating this
necrotic environment inside the
brain and then then your head swells
when you get radiation right so you get
you get dexamethasone you get a lot of
dexamethasone because you got a lot of
edema in the brain not only from the
tumor but from the radiation and all
this other stuff and this brings in
glucose high levels of glucose so the
two prime fuels that these tumor cells
need to survive are provided by the
standard of care and not only that they
give you temis olomide which even incre
increases more of the necrosis and
inflammation and to make matters worse
these cells are all infected most of
them not all of them with human cyto
megala virus which use glucose and
glutamine and feed it into the Met
Machinery of the tumor cell this is the
perfect storm of adverse
effects knowing what I know I would
never do this to anybody this this is
the standard of
care now you want to see how it works
okay so let's look at the survival of
standard of care and this is the the the
surviv okay so if you just take
radiation by itself in this big trial
nobody survived there wasn't a single
zero now what here's a big breakthrough
talide used with radiotherapy gave us
the first major advance in survival in
brain cancer I was at the the talk when
they mention oh this is the greatest
thing you can take it as a pill form you
don't have to be injected with it and
all this kind of stuff and we get a
little bit of an increase in survival
you can see radiotherapy with this is a
major Advance right here so now what
came out recently is a paper temis
olomide increases driver mutations in
the tumor tissue I said what's this okay
so driver I just went through this big
thing about cancer say all the driver
genes and everybody thinks this is
what's causing the cancer now what's
going on here is you you give a drug
temis olomide increases these so-called
bad mutations that make it grow faster
should but yet the people live a little
longer how do you explain this on the
Theory here's the gene Theory it's
telling me if I have all these mutations
anog and tumor suppressor genes driver
genes why the patients are living longer
when you give them the drug that
increases these
mutations all right so what I said look
what happens when a patient takes T
olomide I gave it to some of my mice it
was like the worst thing I could ever
imagine look at the mouse he's like dead
in three days he's starving to death and
everything I said what's going on so so
I I take this I said look at the what
are the patients get fatigue nausea
diarrhea vomiting all of these things
are secondary forms of calorie
restriction do you think it's possible
that this little blip in survival might
be due to an independent effect rather
than what they think it's doing now who
is going to run a clinical trial to test
that
hypothesis so we we've abandoned our
thinking along those lines we've come up
with this concept of the press pulse
Paradigm which I think and Dom and a
bunch of us think is going to be a
more a more rational way to deal deal
with this cancer now will it work I
think so but it needs to be proven now
what we're going to do is we have these
cells in our body that are tumor cells
and they are filled with mutations no
denying that we have listen there's
plenty of when we take our body and we
fast and we go through these different
scenarios our cells earn the right to
live in this body because we evolved
over millions of years from all these
other organisms we are tough our normal
cells can make these metabolic
transitions because our genomes are are
were evolved to do that these tumor
cells are loaded with mutations when you
do that they you have all these
mutations you saw how they block
development well they're going to block
the transition from going from one one
state to another and we think this is
the way we're going to be able to manage
this we use a ketogenic diet in to form
a total press on the body a mild
metabolic stress that puts these tumor
cells makes them vulnerable then we come
in with non-toxic drugs and we hit them
we hit them we hit them this way we hit
them that way we hit them this way as
long as they're under the press and we
think we can do this non- toxically to
keep people alive because we've shown it
in the mice when we combine certain
drugs with the diet we get Synergy the
diet is the press the pulse is the drug
non-toxic drug Dom dagostino and his
group we published this showing systemic
metastatic cancer the blue is all these
tumor cells that are lit up they're blue
all over the mouse because they're
spreading just like human metastatic
cancer hyperbaric oxygen does a little
bit the diet does of course has some
significant effect but when you combine
the two together you get Synergy
non-toxic Synergy we just don't know all
the right ways to do this yet or the
dosage is the or the or the best way and
what state you have to be in but we
think we can Perfect all that this is
another 25% of all cancer deaths come
from metastasis from some organ to the
brain okay so we have the heads like so
we have this model you put the cells in
the flank and you can see the the tumor
cells go to the mouse's brain and the
mice this is just like human we put them
on these calorie restricted ketogenic
diets and we significantly reduce the
spread of the tumor from an organ to the
brain so we're able to show you do how
to do this now the problem is I'll just
briefly mention this people don't know
if you have cancer you don't know when
you're in this metabolic Zone how are
you going to do if you run a clinical
trial how do we know this so we my
students and I developed the glucose
Ketone index it's it's ridiculously
simple you just divide glucose by the
millimolar and Ketone millimolar you
come up with a number and what we found
is the closer that number is to one or
below 1.0 you're in this metabolic Zone
that's putting a lot of pressure on
these tumor cells okay this gives the
patient an opportunity to look at where
he stands today it's like somebody with
who has diabetes they look at them oh
look at my blood sugar's a little high
better take some insulin or better take
some metformin or something like this
you can you can patients now and their
caregivers can now administer these
kinds of uh of they can use this as a
tool to assess their therapeutic
efficacy now what I did is I edited a
big uh series of public ation uh on
ketones not only for brain cancer we're
now realizing that these ketones have
tremendous power to manage a number of
chronic diseases like Alzheimer's
disease Parkinson's disease traumatic
brain injury they reduce inflammation
they provide an alternative fuel to the
brain and suppress a lot of the damaging
events that occur through aging or or
chronic trauma or or acute trauma and I
if if you're interested we're putting
this together together now the
academicians are starting to take notice
of what's going on a lot of this is in
my book on cancer as a metabolic disease
I also want to bring your attention to
the book that Travis wrote uh he Travis
couldn't believe what I was saying in my
book he said I can't believe this so he
said I have to go out and talk to those
geneticists and those scientists at
these big universities and find out what
what do they think about all this and
and he came away with the he said these
guys are these guys are lost these guys
who doing these genomic studies they can
say everything can be anything in its
opposite there's no no Rhyme or Reason
to any of this stuff yet we're plowing
ahead with billions of dollars so he
wrote a book for the lay person more or
less like a like a a journalist going
around getting personal he wants to talk
to the scientists that did the work or
how they feel about it comes out very
interesting so in conclusion preclinical
and case report studies indicate that
the restricted ketogenic diet Can Be an
Effective non-toxic metabolic for for
children and adults and that this
therapeutic can be enhanced if we
combine it with the Press pulse Paradigm
these are non-
approaches I can't tell you whether it's
going to be the solution to the cancer
problem but I can tell you I think it
works and it's not going to hurt you and
it has the potential mechanistically to
be very
effective now a lot of my collaborators
at different universities a lot of
Physicians and basic researchers uh dam
is here you know Joe maroon at
Pittsburgh team surgeon for the
Pittsburgh Steelers I mean we have we
have a number of people that are are
gathering together that are basically
outraged about this cancer situation and
they want to do something about it and I
want to thank you for
[Music]
attention thank
you yes
questions if somebody currently has can
answer is there any kind of uh ketogenic
protocol or diet that they should follow
yes the question is do we have diets and
protocols and the answer is yes uh there
are a number of new books that have
appeared uh people the caregivers
themselves are writing these books and
they have a lot of firsthand experience
with themselves or with their own family
members and they work a lot of times uh
they'll work on the phone as a
consultation service and they'll get you
in touch with certain Physicians that
know how to apply this un unfortunately
they're few and far between you won't
often find them at the top medical
schools unfortunately so we're waiting
for
the well we find them by the you you
consult the there was phone numbers and
I have lists of Physicians that I give
in these packets that I hand out to the
because I have over 1,000 emails from
cancer patients and I I'm not a
physician I can't administer medicine I
can't do that but what I can do is put
these people in contact with those who
know how to do this and that's what I
try to do
yes thanks uh doctor I sell Hammers and
I am a long long way from the
technicalities and the science you've
just described but to me listening to
you it's inarguable or unarguable could
you just for a moment switch feet and
give me some
arguments to disprove what you've said
to
me yeah um and that's the that's the
the uh assignment that I give to my
students because I said if we if the
students get an A if they can disprove
what I'm saying and they've been trying
for the last three
semesters so not that you can't because
there are people who have their whole
livelihood wrapped up into this Gene
Theory and you're not going to change
the mind of those people especially when
their salaries depend upon them not
believing
this all right there's a lot of
Institution believe me what I say sounds
great and
wonderful but the devil is in the
details because this is a very difficult
thing but you know where it's going to
come from it's going to come from folks
like you it's going to come from the
people that the
consumer the consumer is going to want
it because you go to you go to mfet you
go to these other place you go to Dana
Farber you go to MD Anderson you go to
the Sloan ketering they're not going to
tell you what I told you but they don't
prove me
wrong so what's going on here all right
this why it's a big it's going to be a
big big something's going to happen we
as I said to someone today we have two
choices we can status qu can do we can
go with the flow for the next hundred
years and get cancer drugs that going
cost $100,000 and the cost is passed on
to the to the Next Generation and you
live three or four extra months because
don't forget every month we have a new
cure for cancer it's in the Wall Street
Journal it's in Time
Magazine but I look at the numbers the
numbers are not changing now who well
how can you explain that oh it's coming
hope hope hope I look at it differently
I see something that can possibly work
and not hurt people oh they say the
ketogenic diet is is harmful to relative
to
what
kolide give me a break yes thank
you you're scared to Living Daylights
out of me with a vast and yeah I um had
a melanoma in the
retina and it was too close to the line
of sight Vision so they did plaque
seating in 2009 in Boston at toughs
you and uh everything was great for
three years I came to Dr dooker is the
one and it came to five years I was
cancer free they said in your home but
in the past two years my eyesight has
been going
down and so I had a fluid buildup and
you uh just said a vastin so a vastin
has been injected into my
eye uh now let Let Me Maybe about seven
six seven times Now to control the fluid
and you said it's the worst drug in the
world it's the worst drug for GBM gleo
blastoma mapori and it was pulled off
the market for breast cancer however
there are certain situations like the
one you have where the therap IES are
shown to be much better okay I gave it
to you from the GLE gleo blastoma and
the breast cancer angle okay and because
I have the data on that but I've also
seen that for some other indications it
seems to work better than some of these
invasive cancers so I I and thank you
for bringing that because I have to CL I
can clarify some of these these issues
but is it going to do more damage than
good it's I I can't be sure about that I
don't think anybody can be I'm just
saying for what for what the kinds of
cancers that it that it doesn't work
well for I can't I'm not going to say
it's because they they are in fact it is
approved for certain indications and it
does everybody does use it for those but
they use it for other indications which
I think the data clearly argues against
them doing that is there a diet that I
could do that help that fluid get rid of
that flu well you know you can talk to
dog Dom dagostino and and some of these
other guys I mean none of these diets
are ever harmful to your body they're
only going to help you you know I can't
be sure you have to monitor all this has
to be monitored you like we said is it
going to help how do I know well look at
the pet scans look at the look at the
things that happen in your body how do
you feel you know most of the people say
hi you know how you doing I you feel
good you know that's there's a lot to be
said for feeling good you
know oh yeah maybe back
there sorry thank you you for taking the
question um you specified the raw vegan
diet is there some particular rationale
uh for using that diet well only because
I experienced it myself and I spoke to
patients oneon-one a whole number of
cancer patients horrific stories I
couldn't believe it myself but I spoke
to them and I questioned them very
carefully about it over here in West
Palm Beach the hypocrates Health
Institute you know it that raw vegan
diet is pretty tough to take you know
you lose weight on it you're chewing all
day long like some farm animal you know
the the the the aroma coming out of the
kitchen from the raw vegan you close the
door you go the other way you know but
it works it works on a lot of people but
not everybody all right I try doing it
you know it's like okay I I would only
did it for three days but if I did it
for the three weeks like they told me
I'd come out probably a new evolved
person
yeah yeah
yes um probably as an over
simplification if you were to take say
the Atkins diet which is obviously uh
promoting ketosis how much different
isur is it basically just a whole lot
less food on the same basic principle or
is something different it's a little
different the question is the Atkins
does this differ because everybody talks
about the Atkins Atkins has too much
protein in it and the protein puts puts
a lot of pressure on your kidneys and it
also can be used by the liver to make
glucose so we're we're because the
Atkins diet says eat all the the the
meat and just don't eat any carbs you
know that's not good measure your
measure your glucose Ketone index if
you're de near one I don't care what
kind of diet you're on if you're near
one your B those tumor cells are going
to be under pressure all right so people
say well can I you know you want to eat
a bangle you know eat one Bagel a week
and that's all you eat a week you know
then you see you oh look at I'm doing
really well you you know so you know it
depends on the ratio this is why we
built the ratio so patients can know
everybody ask can I eat this can I eat
that I said what's your ratio oh I'm up
near 12 you can't eat
that all right so yes for one more
question no I yeah right
I guess consensus is that cancer is more
prevalent in our society today rather
than four or 500 years ago with the
death rate well in child birth and what
have you can is there a correlation
between periodic fasting because I know
that in medieval days this was a very
common occurrence for people to go on
periodic fast you know whether it was
church related or what what are your
feelings about well I did a very a big
investigation into this I talk to I
talked to the president of the calorie
restriction Society of
America and I asked him how many people
in your organization have
cancer and he and his wife that run this
they run 60 Minutes you know everybody
sits around they're all like stick thin
they're very thin people and they have a
they have their business meeting they
all sit around and share a grape you
know so
I asked him where how he said oh yeah
you know John back in 1978 I think he
had some cancer but they don't have
cancer because they're always under
their mitochondria purin you don't get
cancer unless you damage your
mitochondria and these people under
these fasting conditions that have low
glucose and high ketones they're in that
ketotic in that zone very few people on
the planet can do that all right you got
to be like somebody different I mean you
going to a pizza shop your knees become
weak I mean you're not going to be doing
this you know you have to know how to
balance this stuff up but there are
people that are extremist like this and
they don't have your answer is right
they don't have cancer all this stuff
came when we changed the Food and Drug
Administration labels in the early 80s
and we got all this high fructose corn
syrup into the food chain and now we're
getting the infl body inflammation all
these chronic diseases dementia
Parkinson's all this stuff is all
related to the same thing which is
called preent now how do you prevent
prevention is a different issue I have a
big section of my book on prevention
nobody care not many people care about
prevention I get cancer what are you
going to do for me now well you should
have done this well I'm not doing that
all right so so now what do you do it's
it's a whole so it's a whole thing about
looking at this but you can prevent but
you have to kind of change your and and
the food industry doesn't help us we're
not using natural stuff here everything
is like people are on the run all the
time I got to come home let me eat this
stuff eat that you don't have time to
sit down and do all and it's putting
ourselves at risks we're putting
ourselves at risk it's us it's the food
industry and
us and with that let's thank our
speaker thank you